"Spawn Egg item" and "Datagen: Item Models" (#329)
FabricMC/fabric-docs: develop/data-generation/item-models.md

| `KeybindDownProperty`  | True when a specified key is pressed.                                          |
| `UsingItemProperty`    | True when the item is being used (e.g. when blocking with a shield).           |
| `BrokenProperty`       | True when the item has 0 durability (e.g. elytra changes texture when broken). |
| `HasComponentProperty` | True when the item has a certain component.                                    |

Of course, this isn't all of them. There is plenty more that will almost certainly cover your needs.

The third and fourth parameters are the models used when the property is true or false respectively.

<VideoPlayer src="/assets/develop/data-generation/item-model/flashlight_turning_on.webm">Flashlight turning on and off</VideoPlayer>

_**assets/modid/items/flashlight.json**_

@[code](@/reference/latest/src/main/generated/assets/fabric-docs-reference/items/flashlight.json)

<DownloadEntry visualURL="/assets/develop/data-generation/item-model/flashlight_textures_big.png" downloadURL="/assets/develop/data-generation/item-model/flashlight_textures.zip">Flashlight</DownloadEntry>

:::warning IMPORTANT

> When obtaining `Identifier`s for the `ItemModels.basic()`, always use `itemModelGenerator.upload()` or any other method using it, otherwise your item model files won't generate, only item model definitions!

Reviewer: I don't understand this line.

Author: If you'd pass in only an `Identifier`, the model wouldn't be added to the `modelCollector`, which is essentially a supplier of all models for which JSON files should be generated.

:::

### Composite Item Models {#composite-item-models}

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model:composite](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

> These item models are composed of one or more textures layered on top of each other. There isn't any vanilla method for this, you have to use `ItemModelGenerator`'s `output` field and then `accept()` for it to be working.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These item models are composed of one or more textures layered on top of each other. There aren't any vanilla methods for this, you have to use `ItemModelGenerator`'s `output` field and then `accept()` for it to work.
```

### Select Item Models {#select-item-models}

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model:select](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

Renders an item model based on the value of a specific property. These are some of them:

| Property                    | Description                                                                                        |
|-----------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `ContextDimensionProperty`  | Renders an item model based on the dimension in which the player is (Overworld, Nether, End).      |
| `MainHandProperty`          | Renders an item model when the item is equipped in player's main hand.                             |
| `DisplayContextProperty`    | Renders an item model based on the position in which the item is (`ground`, `fixed`, `head`, ...). |
| `ContextEntityTypeProperty` | Renders an item model based on the entity holding the item.                                        |

> In this example, the item changes texture when traveling between dimensions; green in Overworld, red in the Nether and black in the End.

Reviewer: TIL you can do that

![Dimensional crystal changing texture based on dimension](/assets/develop/data-generation/item-model/crystal.png)

_**assets/modid/items/dimensional_crystal.json**_

@[code](@/reference/latest/src/main/generated/assets/fabric-docs-reference/items/dimensional_crystal.json)

<DownloadEntry visualURL="/assets/develop/data-generation/item-model/dimensional_crystal_textures_big.png" downloadURL="/assets/develop/data-generation/item-model/dimensional_crystal_textures.zip">Dimensional Crystal</DownloadEntry>

### Range Dispatch Item Models {#range-dispatch-item-models}

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model:range-dispatch](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

> Renders an item model based on the value of a numeric property. Take in an item and list of variants paired with a value. There are quite a few, here are some examples:

Reviewer: Perhaps info on where to find more? Is there a common interface? Not necessary, just a minor touch-up.

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model-custom:item-model](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

The `item()` method creates a new `Model` instance, pointing to the `scaled2x.json` file inside the `resources/assets/mod_id/models/item` folder.

TextureKey `LAYER0` represents the `#layer0` texture variable, which will then be replaced by an identifier pointing to a texture.

### Custom Datagen Method {#custom-datagen-method}

The last step is creating a custom method, which will be called in the `generateItemModels()` method and will be responsible for generating our item models.

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model-custom:item-datagen-method](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

Let's go over what the parameters are for:

1. ``Item item``: The item, for which we are generating the models (in this case `ModItems.BALLOON`).
2. ``ItemModelGenerator generator``: the same that get passed into the `generateItemModels()` method. Used for its fields.

> First, we get the ``Identifier`` of the item with `BALLOON.upload()`, passing in a ``TextureMap`` and the `modelCollector` from our `generator` parameter.

Reviewer: I'm curious, are the double graves (\`\`) for yarn-mapped things?

Reviewer: Reviewed as a dev knowing nothing about item model definitions.

Reviewer 2: > I'm curious, are the double graves (\`\`) for yarn-mapped things?

no, they are unnecessary.

---
title: Item Model Generation
description: A guide to generating item models via datagen.

> authors:

Reviewer: Does this need to be alphabetized?

### Simple {#simple}

Simple item models are the default, and they're what most Minecraft items use. Their parent model is `GENERATED`. They use their 2D texture in the inventory, and are rendered in 3D in-game. An example would be boats, candles or dyes.

::: tabs

== Source Code

@[code transcludeWith=:::generated](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/ExampleModModelProvider.java)

== Client Item

`generated/assets/example-mod/items/ruby.json`

@[code](@/reference/latest/src/main/generated/assets/example-mod/items/ruby.json)

== Item Model

`generated/assets/example-mod/models/item/ruby.json`

@[code](@/reference/latest/src/main/generated/assets/example-mod/models/item/ruby.json)

You can find the exact default values for rotation, scaling and positioning of the model in the [`generated.json` file from the Minecraft assets](https://mcasset.cloud/1.21.10/assets/minecraft/models/item/generated.json).

== Texture

<DownloadEntry visualURL="/assets/develop/data-generation/item-model/ruby_big.png" downloadURL="/assets/develop/data-generation/item-model/ruby.png">Ruby Texture</DownloadEntry>

:::

### Handheld {#handheld}

> Handheld item models are generally used by tools and weapons (axes, swords, trident). They are rotated and positioned a little differently from the simple models to look more natural in hand. Other than that, they look exactly the same as the simple ones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Handheld item models are generally used by tools and weapons (axes, swords, trident). They are rotated and positioned a little differently from the simple models to look more natural in hand.
```
Could shorten if desired.

::: tabs

== Source Code

@[code transcludeWith=:::handheld](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/ExampleModModelProvider.java)

== Client Item

`generated/assets/example-mod/items/guidite_axe.json`

@[code](@/reference/latest/src/main/generated/assets/example-mod/items/guidite_axe.json)

== Item Model

`generated/assets/example-mod/models/item/guidite_axe.json`

@[code](@/reference/latest/src/main/generated/assets/example-mod/models/item/guidite_axe.json)

You can find the exact default values for rotation, scaling and positioning of the model in the [`handheld.json` file from the Minecraft assets](https://mcasset.cloud/1.21.10/assets/minecraft/models/item/handheld.json).

== Texture

<DownloadEntry visualURL="/assets/develop/data-generation/item-model/guidite_axe_big.png" downloadURL="/assets/develop/data-generation/item-model/guidite_axe.png">Guidite Axe Texture</DownloadEntry>

:::

### Dyeable {#dyeable}

> Dyeable items require a default decimal color value, which is used when the item is not dyed. The default value for leather is `0xFFA06540`. The method for dyeable items generates a simple item model and a client item which specifies the tint color.

Reviewer: Tint color - is that default color?

Reviewer: Or a tint after adding dye?

Reviewer 3: I reorganized this paragraph to hopefully make it more clear.
